Architecture
============

WikiMason keeps deterministic wiki logic in Python and exposes a
filesystem-backed CLI with configurable tool profiles. Runtime bridge
commands are not part of the product surface.

Purpose and constraints
-----------------------

- Single package at repository root: ``wikimason/``.
- Python 3.10+.
- Minimal runtime dependencies: Typer, Click, PyYAML, RapidFuzz,
  fuzzysearch, and tomli for Python < 3.11.
- Deterministic local filesystem operations.
- No upstream Obsidian CLI dependency.

Main layers
-----------

CLI
  Typer-based command surface with consistent ``--format text|json`` output
  and structured exit codes.

Operational log
  ``Wiki/log.md`` is an append-only operational timeline with typed events,
  automatic command logging for important change/audit commands, ``log tail``,
  and ``log check`` validation.

Config and profile
  TOML configuration resolved from explicit ``--config``, local
  ``wikimason.toml``, ``--env`` profiles, and built-in defaults. The active
  profile (Markdown, Obsidian, or Logseq) controls on-disk page layout,
  frontmatter format, and link rendering.

Filesystem
  Profile-aware page path resolution, safe vault-relative file operations,
  and structured directory layout with ``Raw/``, ``Wiki/``, ``Schema/``,
  and ``_templates/``.

Source lifecycle
  Import raw sources with content hashing and stable ``source_id``
  assignment. Manifest tracking in ``Schema/source-manifest.jsonl``.
  Scan, delta, verify, rehash, and lint operations.

Build and lint
  Compile ``AGENTS.md`` from schema, policy, and command metadata.
  Generate and validate indexes, catalogs, and command references.
  Lint pages for schema compliance, link integrity, and source parity.

Search
  Catalog-based keyword and fuzzy search across compiled wiki pages.

Runtime workflows
-----------------

Init
  ``wikimason init <profile> <path>`` scaffolds a complete vault with
  directories, templates, schema files, git hooks, and ``AGENTS.md``.

Source ingest
  ``wikimason source add`` → ``source scan`` → ``source delta`` →
  ``ingest status`` → ``ingest plan`` → ``note new`` →
  ``ingest finish``.

Vault maintenance
  ``wikimason vault maintain`` verifies, rebuilds, scans, lints, and
  audits all tracked state in one pass, then validates the operational log.

Generated artifacts and ownership
---------------------------------

These files are generated by WikiMason and should not be hand-edited:

- ``Schema/source-manifest.jsonl``
- ``Schema/command-reference.md``
- ``Schema/frontmatter-schema.md``
- ``Schema/agent-workflow.md``
- ``Wiki/catalog.jsonl``
- ``Wiki/index.md``
- ``Wiki/log.md``
- ``AGENTS.md``
